If you've been listening to AWS Bites for a
while, you've probably noticed a pattern.
We keep coming back to Lambda, and that's not a
coincidence.
We're big fans.
It's one of those services we like because it's
very convenient.
You can write tiny little functions in the
programming language you like.
They run on demand when specific events happen.
They scale like crazy when you need them to,
and scale to zero when nothing happens,
even better.
and you only pay for what you use.
Of course, Lambda is not always the best
solution for everything, as lots of listeners
like to remind us, which is completely fair.
The moment you try to do anything that looks
like a workflow, for example, Lambda can start
to feel like it's fighting against you.
You've got 15 minutes max execution time.
It's stateless by default.
And if you need some orchestration,
retries, back off, all that kind of stuff,
you end up bolting on something like step
functions, queues, schedules, and a bunch of
extra stuff you didn't really want in the
beginning.
And it's not always easy to get that stuff
working reliably.
Now what if you could keep the lambda model we
all know and love, but add a few extra
superpowers that might help us to overcome some
of those challenges?
Well, last December we got a few new superpowers
at reInvent 2024,
AWS Lambda Durable Functions were announced.
And to be honest, we're pretty excited about
this one.
Now, it's still Lambda, it still has the same
runtime and the same scaling, but with a
framework that can now checkpoint progress,
suspend execution when you need to wait,
can resume later from a safe point,
skipping the work you already completed.
And this is what we're going to talk about in
detail today.
We're going to break down
What durable actually means in practice and how
this whole resume mechanism works under the
hood.
We'll talk about when this approach is a huge
win compared to the usual patterns.
And of course, the gotchas that can surprise
you, especially around determinism,
item potency, and debugging resumed executions.
Finally, we'll also talk about one of our own
open source applications that we rebuilt from
scratch to have an excuse to use durable Lambda
functions and see what it feels like to use them
in a real project.
My name is Eoin, I'm joined by Luciano,
and this is AWS Bites.
Okay, Luciano, would you like to start off by
telling us what is a durable function and what
are the basic ideas around it?
Of course, yeah.
So as you said in the intro,
it's still lambda, right?
It's the same service, it's the same model,
the same scaling.
That doesn't change.
So that also means that you still write a lambda
and lambda the usual way with the same run times
that you know and love, the same type of
resources, the same scaling mechanics.
Now the
difference is that now there is a new flag that
you can turn on to basically turn a regular
Lambda function into a durable Lambda function.
And that basically opts in the function into
what is called the durable execution engine that
you can now use through a dedicated SDK.
So there are these new capabilities that we
described and they become available by using a
special SDK that you need to install.
What is the core difference?
So there is, I guess, a mental shift that we
need to start embracing when we switch a regular
lambda function into a durable function,
which basically is that you have to stop
thinking about one lambda invocation and start
thinking about a workflow made of atomic steps.
So this dedicated SDK basically allows you to
write inside the code, inside your handler,
your business logic as a sequence of explicitly
named steps.
And you can think of every step as an atomic
unit of work.
So you can think about, OK, do this,
then do that.
And of course, each step has clear boundaries
and outcomes.
And this step model is basically what makes the
idea of checkpointing possible.
And this idea basically means that after a step
is completed, the framework can create a
checkpoint, which is basically a way of saying
that all the state that was
in the lambda function at that point is
persisted in this workflow.
So it's like, okay, we are doing progress,
we completed this step, the result of this step
was an object, for example, that object is
persisted inside the runtime execution state.
And other than that, we also have to talk about,
because we mentioned suspension, so what does
that mean?
When this lambda function execution can stop.
And it can stop for a few different reasons.
For instance, there could be unexpected stops,
if there is an error, or some kind of crash,
a timeout, or something like that.
In that case, there will be a retry mechanism
that kicks in and will start to re-execute the
function.
Or maybe there are planned stops as well.
And this is also a new concept because basically
sometimes in your business logic, you just have
to wait for something externally to happen.
We'll talk about some examples in a second.
And the idea is that when you want to wait,
you don't need to keep the Lambda running
because that consumes resources and it's going
to cost you money because you have CPU and
memory that gets occupied doing nothing
effectively.
So what happens is that with durable function,
the Lambda can now be suspended, which means
that it's literally, the instance is literally
stopped.
So nothing is running, you're not going to be
paying for that until something happens that
basically wakes up the execution and basically
starts a new fresh execution.
But with all this state,
that we discussed before with the checkpoint
mechanism being preserved and restored.
Now, you
might be wondering what are some good examples
of wait steps.
They might be timer-based.
For example, you can just say, OK,
I know that the external action is going to take
three seconds, for example.
So I'm just going to drop in a wait of
maybe four seconds if you just want to play it
short.
But you can predict more or less how much time
you're going to need.
And you can just leap for that amount of time.
Another thing could be wait for another compute
step.
For example, you might be invoking another
lambda.
And we know that this is generally an
anti-pattern.
But in this case, it might be starting to become
acceptable.
But if you are calling another lambda,
you can wait for that other lambda to finish.
And while you are waiting, your execution gets
suspended and then resumed only when the other
lambda completes and returns some kind of
response.
Or
maybe you can wait until a generic condition is
satisfied, which is basically a little bit of a
wrapper around the weight model, the one we
described before, the timer-based weight model.
And the idea is that you can say,
OK, I'm going to wake up this function every few
seconds.
and then I'm going to check on a condition and
if that condition is satisfied I'm going to stop
sleeping and progress to the next step.
Otherwise I'm going to go to sleep again and
wait for the next timer interval to resume and
check the condition again.
And then another one that you might be familiar
with if you use step functions is the waiting
for an external callback.
So you could create this concept of a callback.
So it's almost like a unique ID that another
service can then use to programmatically wake up
that lambda function execution.
So this is generally useful, for instance,
when you have a human in the loop.
So you might have some kind of UI that gets
triggered with that callback ID.
Then the user will see some kind of interface
and be able to decide, OK, maybe do some action
and then decide whether that execution should
progress or maybe be interrupted.
And in that case, that UI you implemented is
going to trigger the callback mechanism to
resume the lambda invocation.
Now, there are
some other interesting implications.
For instance, one of the main ones is that a
durable execution can last up to one year.
And this is, again, similar to stack functions.
And by the way, this doesn't have to be confused
with the individual lambda invocation,
which is still 15 minutes.
This basically means that every time you suspend
the execution and then resume it, the overall
execution period from the first time that that
lambda invocation started to when it ends can
last one year.
But of course, each execution cannot last longer
than 15 minutes.
And let's actually say that this is convenient,
for instance, if you are waiting for human
approval, that gives you time.
Maybe you are doing something that could take
days for a human to be available and do the
approval, or even months.
And that's still a good programming model for
Lambda durable functions.
Finally, I think it's worth mentioning that when
it stops, either because of a failure in the
execution or because you're waiting for
something, the workflow can later resume from
the last checkpoint.
We'll talk more about the details because I
think there are some important nuances.
Basically, the conceptual idea is that it
doesn't start from the beginning, but it kind of
restarts from whatever was completed is going to
start from the next step.
This is a simplification.
We'll talk more about how exactly that model
works.
But this is how you can build a mental model
for what happens behind the scenes.
So I suppose, yeah, I think that should cover
more or less the main ideas.
What do you think?
Yeah, well, we maybe just talk about what
durable functions can do that, like a standard
Lambda function cannot.
One thing is you can run multi-step workflows
just in code without having to roll your own
Lambda queue state.
The next Lambda orchestration, it's probably a
lot more easy for people to reason about.
It can be very difficult sometimes when you've
got your contacts split across multiple
different AWS services.
And then you can suspend and resume cleanly.
So for things like timers, callbacks,
as you mentioned, and human approvals,
of course, without burning compute and paying
for it while you're waiting.
You can also keep reliable progress
automatically by using the checkpointing
feature, so completed steps aren't redone when
the execution does resume.
And also you can then apply resilience controls
at the step level, so you can
add retries back off and jitter without
returning your business logic into a whole load
of retry state plumbing.
So it's a little bit of the benefit of that
that you get from step functions, but it's in
the language that you prefer to use.
For when it comes to
Workflow hygiene, I suppose you could say that's
can be often painful to build yourself like
deduplication, cancellation and compensation.
Like we're thinking about saga style rollbacks,
maybe to get that distributed transaction kind
of effect.
And that's something you can do with durable
functions.
And overall, the development and operations
experience is improved, I would say,
with a better testability story and just clearer
observability around a single durable execution
and its steps.
OK, so that's how it compares to regular Lambda
as we see it.
It might be useful then to share what kind of
good use cases do we have that where you might
think, OK, this is a good fit for durable
functions.
Let's give it a try.
Yeah, I actually read recently on Yan Cui's
newsletter one example that I found very good in
terms of explaining the capabilities.
So I'm just going to steal that.
Sorry, Yan, if you're listening.
So the idea is basically you can build an order
processing workflow for a food delivery service.
So the idea could be, okay, there is some kind
of trigger and a new order comes in.
You might imagine, I don't know, there is a
website or a mobile application where a user can
place an order and that's basically the starting
point.
There is an event once the order is being placed
and that event triggers a durable lambda
function which implements the following workflow
in steps.
So the first step is basically save the order
details in a database.
Then, of course, we are going to broadcast this
order placed event into EventBridge.
And this is basically where the
human-in-the-loop might come in.
So we might want to implement some kind of
restaurant confirmation so that EventBridge
triggers, effectively, somehow triggers a
notification to the restaurant, maybe through
another web application or mobile application
that is available to the restaurant,
where they will see, okay, there is this new
order coming in, do you want to accept it or
reject it?
And you can imagine that, I don't know,
maybe the restaurant is about to close,
maybe they run out of ingredients,
maybe they are overbooked,
So there
might
be several reasons why the restaurant might not
be in a position to accept that order.
So the human-in-the-loop, in this case,
is an important element of this business flow.
And of course, you might also want to apply a
timeout because maybe it makes sense for a
customer not to wait forever if, for whatever
reason, the restaurant cannot even receive that
notification.
Maybe they receive it and nobody is available to
actually respond to it in a timely manner.
So imagine this mechanism.
So your lambda, a durable function,
is suspended.
This event is going to get to the restaurant
somehow, and the restaurant is going to have
some kind of application that can use the
callback to resume or reject that execution,
which is effectively confirming or rejecting
that particular order.
And I guess this is the example that Yan
provided, but you could imagine that you could
extend this example even further if you want to
think about a slightly more complex workflow.
You can imagine, OK, once the order is accepted,
then you can also start to track the progress of
that order.
Maybe the food preparation, or I don't know,
maybe it's even before that it's waiting in a
queue, then it's getting prepared,
then picked up by the delivery driver,
then
is delivered and then maybe you can even have a
final step which is waiting for customer
feedback.
So each of these steps can be implemented as
steps inside the Durable Function Lambda code.
And if you want to think about other examples
just to, I don't know, provide more use cases,
more food for thought, one other good use case
that I've seen is tenant onboarding.
So imagine you have a multi-tenant system.
Generally, the onboarding of a new tenant has
lots of steps.
You might want to provision infrastructure.
You might want to configure identity providers.
You might want to think about billing and
setting up payments.
you might model all of that with a durable
lambda function at each step.
You might even have, I don't know,
a human in the loop, you might have review
steps, and if something fails, you know that all
the previous steps can be easily reverted,
or maybe you can just resume and then try to
complete the missing ones.
Payment retries is another good use case because
sometimes, for example, if you have a system
that expects to have recurring payments,
It's very common that if you are charging,
for example, a credit card, it might happen that
that credit card doesn't have enough credit at
the time of charge.
But then if you retry maybe two days later,
it's going to work.
So you could model, for example, that kind of
behavior in a durable lambda function.
And another one, which is a little bit of a
spoiler, because that's actually what we
implemented for our use case, is media
processing.
Media processing generally involves lots of
steps like conversion, creating thumbnails,
transcriptions, and all kinds of things.
So you can imagine that that complicated
workflow can be modeled as a durable function.
If something fails at any point, you can resume
from the last functional bit and you don't have
to redo a bunch of steps that might actually be
very expensive from a computational perspective.
So I think that gives you probably a good few
ideas on where you can use this pattern and this
new capability of lambda function.
So now I would like to talk about what does
the experience of writing AWS durable function
looks like.
But good news, I guess, as we said,
it's a regular lambda function with a few extra
capabilities, powerful capabilities.
And the way those capabilities are provided is
through a special SDK called the Durable
Functions SDK.
you'll need to install it for the programming
language you want to use.
And right now, what's supported is JavaScript or
TypeScript and Python.
We believe that Java is in the works,
and we even saw a discussion in the Rust SDK
repository, so that might arrive pretty soon.
Now, we were using the JavaScript TypeScript
Durable Functions SDK for our work.
So that's the one we're going to talk about.
Other languages might use a different syntax,
but the capabilities and concepts should be the
same.
So the first thing you'll notice is that the
handler isn't just a normal lambda handler.
You wrap it with a helper called
withDurableExecution that effectively turns on
durable mode and injects a durable context into
your function as a parameter.
Then inside the handler, you don't just write
one big blob of code like you normally do,
you define named atomic steps, right?
So instead of doing work directly,
the function runs work inside explicit named
steps like step one, step two, step three.
And those step boundaries are really meaningful.
They're the points where the platform can track
progress and treat each unit as done when it
comes to things like resuming.
Now, the code at sidesteps is sometimes referred
to as the orchestrator path.
So what this looks like in terms of the SDK
is you'll define a step by calling something
like context.step.
Then you give it a step name and a callback.
And that context you're providing is the special
durable context we mentioned a minute ago.
JavaScript terms, that step.
call returns a promise.
So you typically do const result equals await
context dot step.
And that await, it reads just like normal async
code, but it's also the boundary where the
DurableEngine can track completion and then
persist progress when it's done.
So step results then, the actual result of each
of these steps that you define are treated like
DurableState.
So the function captures results, whatever you
return from each step, in a way that can be
reused when the workflow resumes rather than
re-computing everything.
And then you have the concept of waits.
And a wait is a first class operation.
It's not just a hack.
There's an explicit wait for n minutes construct
that you can use to create a step that simply
suspends your function for a while.
So if you're waiting for something else to
settle.
In a regular lambda, waiting usually means
sleeping and burning up 15 minutes,
and you're paying for it, or you build an
external timer mechanism.
But here, the wait actually suspends the
execution, and the workflow resumes later.
So the function is no longer running,
and you don't pay while you wait.
So with the durable executions mode,
the thing you'll get used to is the fact that
a function execution, it spans multiple
invocations, but it still feels like one flow,
even though it seems like a single sequential
thing under the hood, it'll be starting and
stopping and resuming across separate
invocations continuing from the next step.
And the code is then workflow code.
It's not just request response code with a
little bit of business logic.
The return value is the final outcome of the
durable execution from multiple steps,
not merely the result of one atomic invocation.
So this sounds pretty good.
Should we dive a little bit deeper?
How do they actually work?
What's the magic behind them?
Yeah, I think this is probably one of the most
interesting and perhaps also confusing bits that
you need to understand about lambda durable
functions if you want to use them correctly.
So let's try to deep dive and try to describe
what really happens when, for example,
a step
is completed and the state is persisted,
so a checkpoint, so to speak, is created.
And then what happens when there is a resume,
how things are actually restored and the
execution actually continues from the next logic
step.
So as we said, the core idea is that you
have this concept of execution history.
So whenever an execution starts, you can imagine
that the Lambda service is somewhere capable of
storing state.
And then for each step, which is treated as an
atomic unit, as we said, basically,
when that step completes, you can imagine that
that step inside your code of that step,
you can return data.
And basically, a return from that callback
basically means, well, I was able to calculate
something that I want to retain for the next
resume, or maybe the state of this step,
if you want to think it like that.
This is it.
This is what I am returning.
So make sure it's persisted.
So basically what the SDK does is basically
every time it executes a step, once that step is
successfully completed, if there is a return
value, that return value is sent to the Lambda
service so that it can be persisted.
And this is how the checkpoint mechanism works.
But we also say that there might be cases when
the execution gets suspended or interrupted for
errors, timeouts, or other reasons.
And that in those cases, the execution can be
resumed later.
So what happens on a resume?
And this is, I think, the key thing that we
want you to understand.
If there is one thing you should take away from
this episode, hopefully, it's this one.
Basically, the idea that might be confusing is
that when the lambda resumes from an execution,
it always starts to execute your code from the
beginning.
So imagine you have your handler code,
and there are, I don't know, 100 lines of code.
Even if you executed five steps and you reach
line 50, the next time you resume,
you're still going to restart executing code
from the first line.
So how is that checkpointing mechanism possible?
The idea is that every time a step is
encountered again in the execution from the
first line, basically the Lambda SDK is going to
check
Okay, did I already complete this step before?
And if it did, then it's not going to re-execute
the handler, well, the callback, basically,
of that step, but it's just going to take the
value from the persistent state.
So effectively, you can imagine the execution
flow to be like, okay, I'm going to start from
the beginning and then quickly check.
Did I do step one?
Yes.
Did I do step two?
Did I do step three?
And so on until it gets to a point where,
okay, this is a new step.
which I haven't executed yet.
So this is exactly the point where I am,
in a way, resuming the execution.
But practically speaking, everything gets
executed from the first line every time there is
a resume.
And this is really important because,
effectively, I think it could be a common
misconception to think of suspension like,
OK, you are posing the CPU at a specific line
in the code, like, for instance, when you are
posing a trend or something like that.
And then you just resume from that line of code.
That concept doesn't exist in Durable Function.
It's just you restart from scratch,
but then there is this mechanism that allows the
execution to know, I already completed this
step, so I'm just going to read the result.
and continue from the point where something
still needs to be computed.
In a way you can think about this checkpointing
mechanism like a cache, where basically if you
already have that result computed for this
execution, there is no point in executing it
again, you can just read it from a persistent
state.
And the reason why you need to understand this
is because sometimes it might be
tempting or it might be making sense,
depending on what you're trying to implement,
to use non-deterministic code outside steps,
what we call the orchestrator path before.
Because you can have a sequence of steps,
but of course nothing is stopping you from
having business logic outside steps.
and that's not getting checkpointed.
So if in that code, this orchestrator path code,
you use stuff that is non-deterministic,
for instance, you might use a matrandom or a
UUID, or you might be using time-based logic,
like in JavaScript you might have a date.now,
for example, and then have an if statement that
checks
I don't know, are we after 5 p.m.
and then going to do something?
Otherwise, you're going to do something else.
You need to understand that this is not going to
give you a predictable execution.
Effectively, you are making your execution
non-deterministic because the next time you
resume, you might get different values and
therefore your code is going to take a different
path and you end up with subtle bugs or
behaviors that you didn't expect.
So this is why it's really important to
understand how the model is built and the
checkpointing works, because then you can avoid
these kind of issues.
So hopefully that clarifies, I think,
one of the main misconceptions of durable lambda
functions.
But you might be wondering, because this is a
very new feature, what is the current state in
the ecosystem?
Should I wait before using this new feature,
or maybe it's already in a good state where I
can start leveraging it for my applications?
Okay, let's talk about the whole ecosystem then
and what it's like as a developer,
what the developer experience is, et cetera.
So the SDK for TypeScript, I think we found is
pretty good, right?
It even supports testing as mocking and local
execution, which is really good for DX.
There's some good articles by Eric Johnson.
If you want to see some concrete examples,
we'll have the links in the description.
MIDDY, which seems to be,
keeping really at pace with all the new
developments already supports durable functions.
So again, if you haven't tried MIDI,
there'll be a link to that in the description
too.
The Lambda Power Tools team has worked very
close with the Lambda team to make sure
everything works as expected if you're using
Power Tools.
Still.
Durable functions are still very new,
and there's definitely some room for improvement
in the whole area of DX.
We found some missing features or
inconsistencies in the SDK and some small
glitches in the web console as well.
But it's pretty minor stuff, and we're sure it's
going to be fixed soon.
And I guess we look forward to seeing more
languages supported.
I'm sure Java .NET fans, Golang, will all like
to see it.
The interesting thing on this run is that the
run times don't actually have to change.
It seems to be just an SDK thing that's
required.
So it should just be a matter of time.
And we can guess that the reason why broader
support doesn't exist yet is because AWS is
trying to build these SDK in a way that feels
idiomatic to a specific language.
JavaScript, as we mentioned, relies heavily on
promises, while the Python one uses decorators.
Now, all of the theory and the deep diving is
done.
Shall we talk about the fun part?
What did we build?
Yes, you might remember our podcast
transcription service that we described back in
episode 63.
Or maybe not, because that was three years ago,
pretty much exactly three years.
I think it was somewhat January or February
three
years
ago.
So yeah, if you don't remember, don't worry,
you are officially excused.
But you can always go and check out that old
episode if you're curious.
But I'll give you, or at least I'll try to
give you a quick refresher on what this project
is.
It's called PodWhisperer, and it's basically our
own solution, fully open source, that allows us
to create transcriptions for this very podcast.
It originally was based on OpenAI Whisper and
Amazon Transcribe.
And you might be wondering, why are you using
two different transcription services and not
just one?
But actually, yes, you can listen to the entire
episode to know the entire story.
But in short, we use OpenAI Whisper because it's
really, really good in terms of quality of
transcriptions.
It does recognize most of the words without
mistakes.
But one problem is that it doesn't recognize
speakers.
So what Transcribe does is kind of the opposite.
It isn't always very accurate, as we found,
at least it didn't used to be three years ago.
I don't know if now it has improved,
to be honest.
but it did do three years ago a very good
job at recognizing different speakers.
So giving you like speaker labels,
speaker one, speaker two, trying to figure out
how many people are actually engaging in the
conversation.
So
basically
what we did is, okay, we tried to get the
best of both worlds by doing the transcription
twice, one with one service and one with the
other.
And then we have a slightly convoluted workflow
that tries to join the two results and
extrapolate the information that we need.
from both.
So the actual words from Whisper and the speaker
labels from Transcribe.
And basically PodWhispers was born as a way to
orchestrate this entire workflow.
What we recently discovered is that there is
actually a new project that is based on Whisper
that is called WhisperX.
We'll have the link in the show notes.
And it's actually pretty cool because it's still
using Whisper under the hood, but adds a few
extra steps using additional models.
And those steps are, one, it's adding
world-level timestamp synchronization,
which can be really useful for a bunch of
different use cases that we'll mention in a
second.
And the other step is what's generally called
dialyzation, which is effectively recognizing
different speakers.
So you can imagine internally when you use
WhisperAX, there are three different AI models
that get executed in a pipeline.
The first one just gets the raw words,
the transcription, and then
in segments where a segment starts and finishes.
The next step is a word level timestamp.
So the second model is basically taking the
input of the previous model, the audio file
again, and trying to figure out where each
single word starts and finishes.
And then the third step in the pipeline is
trying to figure out, OK, for each sentence or
segment and word, who is the speaker that is
talking now?
Of course, who is the speaker in the sense of
a speaker label?
It doesn't try to get the name or
just figures out, OK, this is a different person
talking now.
Or maybe it's the same person as before and
calling it speaker 1, 2, 3, and so on.
And the cool thing is that also runs on GPU.
And we noticed that it is much faster at
transcribing when you have a GPU available.
We noticed, for example, on a G5 XLarge that it
takes about five minutes or less to transcribe
30 minutes of audio.
So basically what we thought, because we have
been meaning to switch to a model like this for
a while, we thought okay this is a really good
option that we should try and maybe this can
replace our complex workflow where we try to run
two different transcriptions in parallel and
then join the results.
Maybe just using WhisperX is going to be good
enough for us.
And at the same time, there were a few other
features that we wanted to implement for a while
that we took the opportunity to say,
OK, now that we are rewriting this transcription
workflow, maybe we can also add the extra
features.
One of these features, for example,
is every time we get the transcription file,
in the last few episodes, we started to manually
feed an LLM with this transcription file and
just giving it enough context to understand,
OK, we are talking about something related to
AWS.
And can you make sure that everything makes
sense?
Most likely there might be, I don't know,
things that are misspelled or slightly out of
context or name of services that are not
properly named or casing that is not respected.
The name of the people talking is not always
correct.
For instance, Eoin is always spelled as O-W-E-N.
which we know is not the correct one for you
Eoin.
So all these kind of things actually LLMs are
really really good at fixing.
We used to fix them manually but there's a lot
of work and now you can just drop all of
that text with a little bit of context to an
LLM and you get a pretty good result.
So this is kind of a refinement step.
So we started to realize, actually,
we could do a few more refinement steps.
Another one is we generally get Speaker 1 and
Speaker 2 in our prescriptions, and then we have
to manually check, OK, who is the first one
talking?
OK, this is Speaker 1, and we change the label
manually.
Who is the second one?
We change the label manually.
LLMs are also really good at detecting that,
because generally we say something like,
my name is Luciano and I'm joined by Eoin,
and that's a good signal to the LLM that the
person speaking now is Luciano and the other one
is Eoin.
So we also included in this refinement step,
we tell the LLM, can you try to detect the
names of the speaker and replace the labels?
And the next step is because we have water level
timestamps that are now provided by WhisperX,
One of the problems that you might have noticed
if you used to watch these episodes on YouTube
is that sometimes Whisper gives you pretty big
segments, multiple lines of text.
Sometimes you might see an overlay in our videos
if you use captions that is like three lines of
text, which is pretty unreadable, to be honest.
So this is something that has annoyed me a lot.
And once we started to see world-level
timestamps, then you can start to split the
segments in whatever arbitrary way you want
because, of course, you can decide,
okay,
I want to have always no more than one line
of text and no more than, I don't know,
40 characters or maybe 10 words.
And, of course, we included this logic in our
workflow.
So try to break down the segments into something
that is going to be more readable.
So basically, out of all of these ideas and
features we wanted to implement, this is what we
did for PodWhisperer v2.
And it's all open source.
You can check out the repo.
It will be in the show notes.
And just to recap, what's happening here is we
are also using a few other things that are
pretty cool, in my opinion.
So let me just tell you very quickly what
happens in each step at the end when you use
PodWhisperer.
So the first thing that happens is that we drop
a file into a street, so an audio file,
and that creates an event bridge event.
which effectively is going to start the durable
function execution.
The first
thing that the durable function execution does
is just going to send an event into SQS saying,
this file is available for transcription.
And what happens behind the scenes is that that
SQS is being monitored by an ECS managed
instances cluster.
And if you don't know what that is,
we recently spoke about it at length.
It's episode 150.
Check it out in the show notes.
But the main idea is that we want to have
an easy way to bootstrap a machine that has a
GPU only when there is work to do and then
shut it down when there is no work left.
So that mechanism allows us to do that.
We drop a message into SQS, ECS manages
instances, it's configured to monitor that queue
and spin up an instance when there is work to
do in the queue.
And at that point, the instance, sorry,
the cluster will start as a service configure
that is basically an image with WhisperX already
pre-configured with all the necessary model
preloaded into it.
And it's going to do all the transcriptions,
and then it's going to call a callback.
So this is another detail that maybe I didn't
explain very well.
After we drop something into the queue,
the execution pauses waiting for a callback.
So effectively, the message that we sent into
the queue is, this is the file that needs
transcribing, and this is the callback ID that
you need to call when you're done.
And of course, there is also a timeout that
should be reasonable depending on the length of
your episodes.
If you want to use this tool,
you can configure the length.
In our case, I think it's about 60 minutes,
which should be more than reasonable.
Then we
have all the other steps.
I'm just going to go through them very quickly
because probably they're less interesting.
The second step is basically what we call
replacement rules.
We have a bunch of either strict matches,
like, I don't know, very often we see that,
as I said, Eoin gets misspelled.
So we have all the common misspellings listed
out
and we have replacement rules.
We can also do that using regexes.
For example, in other use cases, AWS bytes often
is spelled with a Y rather than an I,
so we have regexes that capture that and can fix
it on the fly.
Then we have that LLM refinement step,
so it's effectively using Bedrock
and creating a prompt for Bedrock to say,
can you check if there are potential common
issues there and fix them?
And can you also try to identify speakers?
And then give us back a structured JSON that we
can use to reconcile your proposed changes with
our existing transcript.
Then we have the segment normalization step.
So effectively, we break down each segment into
smaller chunks so that they are more readable.
And finally, we have another step that generates
captions in the common formats, for instance,
SRT or VDT, which is what we use on YouTube.
And we also have our own custom JSON format
that's what we use to build our website.
If you notice on our website, you can go to
the transcript tab and you will see the entire
text and you can even click around and that will
move the video to that specific point.
So this is the JSON we use to build that
feature in the UI.
And finally, when everything is done,
we trigger an event-on-event bridge saying
PodWhisperer has finished to do a transcription.
And this is something you can use for any
arbitrary extension mechanism if you want to use
PodWhisperer.
In our case, we have another tool,
also open source, called Episoder,
which you'll find the link in the show notes.
which does another step, which is basically
trying to update the website for us.
So it creates a PR to our website repo with
the new episode description, trying to figure
out what are the chapters, suggesting a
description, suggesting tags for YouTube,
all that kind of stuff.
So again, everything is open source on GitHub.
If you're curious, check it out.
And if you have ideas on how to improve it,
again, open source, feel free to submit issues
or PRs.
Now, probably before we move into final topics,
like comparison with other tools and pricing,
does it make sense to quickly recap some of the
best practices or things that can bite you?
Yeah, because it's kind of a new programming
model, that's a good thing to talk about.
There is an AWS document with some best
practices we'll link in.
But our summary, I guess, is based on what we
discussed so far, any kind of non-deterministic
code, side effects with steps should be wrapped,
like things like random UUID, designed for
idempotency as well.
That's always a good practice with things that
are at least once invocable.
Adopt the replay aware logger from the context.
We also noticed that LLMs don't understand these
rules, so be careful with LLMs in general,
but specifically with new things like durable
functions.
One example there is we got a case where we
wanted to keep track of the total time of
execution of a durable step function.
And of course, the LLM generated code outside a
step, initializing a new data object called
start time.
And for reasons already stated, we know that's
not going to work.
So this is basically breaking one of our rules.
Resume would generate an entirely new date
object, and we wouldn't be able to track the
total time of executions across invocations.
The solution there was just to calculate this
date within a step.
So it's properly persisted as part of the
durable state, and then you can just reload on
resume.
That's your solution.
You have to tell LLMs these rules very
explicitly, and of course, always review the
generated code.
Important topic, Luciano, how much does it cost?
Yes.
So basically, very quickly, doesn't change too
much, meaning that it's the same Lambda pricing
as a base.
But of course, because the Lambda function is
now doing more stuff, you are expected to pay
for those extra features.
So there is an additional cost for durable
operations.
So these are checkpoints related, steps,
weights, callback, et cetera.
Basically, you pay $8 per million operations.
And then also because there is data being
persisted, you have to pay for that.
And it's $0.25 per gigabyte.
And then data retentions is $0.15 per gigabyte
per month.
And this is something you can configure.
I think sometimes it might make sense.
For instance, I don't know, when it comes to
payment, maybe you want to have a longer
retention for whatever reason.
But if it's something that, once it's completed,
you don't really care about, you can have a much
shorter retention and don't have to pay too much
for that.
Now, one thing that I think is really
interesting that I was spending a little bit of
time on is comparing durable function with other
industry tools that are somewhat similar.
I've seen lots of people in the past talking
about DBOS.
So I don't know if something new to the
listeners here, but I always find it very
interesting.
And other options are Temporal or Temporal.
I'm not sure what's the right pronunciation.
and trigger.dev.
And basically you can think of the same story
that we just described for Lambda durable
function as in a more generic service that is
not necessarily tied to Lambda.
For instance, DBOS is effectively,
if you want to do durable execution,
totally open source, you can just pick
whatever machines to run your code or
containers, that's basically it.
It's implemented using Postgres as a mechanism
to persist the state, and then it gives you an
SDK that allows you to write your durable code
in TypeScript, Python, Go, and Java.
And of course, they also have their own cloud
service if you don't want to self-host it,
but I think this is a great option if you
want to self-host this concept of durable
execution.
I think I've seen somewhere, I don't have the
link right now.
If I find it, I'll put it in the show
notes, somebody trying to run DBOS on Lambda,
which I think was a pretty cool idea before
durable function was effectively created by the
Lambda team.
The problem, of course, is that you wouldn't be
able to easily replicate that stop and resume
model.
So you will probably be limited to 15 minutes
execution, or you'll need to do some kind of
crazy orchestration to recreate all the
checkpointing and resuming yourself.
So, I'll try to find that video and if I
find it, I'll link it.
I haven't fully watched it myself,
but that seems really where the benefit of
having a specific service built into Lambda
comes in, because if you have to do it yourself,
it's not easy to do, or it would be much
more limited than you can actually achieve with
a native service.
Then Temporal and Trigger.dev are basically
pretty much the same ideas.
I'm not sure if they both have or not an
open source version, but they are more sold as
kind of hosted services.
I've seen Trigger.dev briefly and it seems like
it has pretty cool UIs and it seems very easy
to use.
So probably another alternative to look for in
case you
you are not really tied to Lambda.
But again, I guess I want to say with this
section of the episode is that this idea is not
new.
It's just the Lambda team figured out,
OK, this is a capability that many people are
actually using.
It is nice to have it in Lambda.
But if for whatever reason you cannot use Lambda
in
another service and you enjoy using durable
function, you can achieve something very similar
using one of these tools.
So that's why we wanted to give a mention to
these other tools.
I think there is another common question that I
heard a lot, even in the presentation talk at
reInvent.
This question came up, and it's basically,
this seems very similar to step functions.
So when should they use durable functions
compared to Step Functions?
Well, you might think that durable functions are
just Step Functions without the ASL,
Amazon States Language, but I don't think that's
necessarily true.
It's obviously going to be down to preference.
If you're very proficient with Step Functions
and the nature of your workflows are not too
complex, that might be fine.
But I've definitely been in the situation where
you end up with
lots of Step Functions with lots of Lambda
functions interspersed where you're doing
business logic, and the switching back and forth
can be a little frustrating.
Durable functions, they're just Lambda
functions, right?
So one of the advantages is that you can use
any event source that works with Lambda to
trigger them.
With Step Functions, I think you could still
trigger them from events, but you don't have the
same set of supported integrations there.
Now, testing and running locally,
The durable functions, as we mentioned already,
seems to be pretty well designed.
I've had a good few attempts with testing and
running Step Functions locally.
And while it's better than it used to be,
it's still pretty hard and not a like for like
experience.
Whereas if you're testing in the language that
you're very familiar with, it's a much more
pleasant experience.
When you're comparing the two as well,
I'd say beware of massive parallelism.
I've been able to do lots of highly scalable
distributed map step functions, and that allows
you to run tens of thousands of jobs in
parallel.
Now, while Durable Functions does support map
steps, it doesn't seem to be designed for that
kind of scale.
We haven't actually tried them yet.
but it does seem like it's more geared towards
smaller volumes of data.
Yeah, I have a few more.
For instance, I think there is a light we have
to shine on the workflow builder of Step
Functions.
Like if you like that visual way of building
different steps, or even, for example,
if you have cases where you're trying to
integrate a bunch of different AWS services,
in Lambda, I think that will be much more
complicated because you have to write code,
make sure to install the correct SDKs.
With Step Functions, you can just drag and drop
and connect different things.
And that gives you also a pretty nice visual
story of, okay, this is what happens and that's
what happens, especially when you start to have
lots of branches.
It
might be
much more complex to represent the same logic
within a durable function.
And for certain, you don't get a visualization
built in.
So that's something that you're going to be
lacking.
I found myself that sometimes when I'm working
on complex step functions, just screenshotting
the flow visualizer is already pretty good
documentation.
While, for example, in a durable function,
that's something you need to do yourself.
You need to create some kind of diagram that
represents all the different states and then
keep it up to date.
So that
might be a
reason, like if you find yourself preferring
more this visual model, I guess that might be a
reason to pick step function in favor of,
I guess, durable functions.
And another thing that is probably worth
mentioning is that when you're doing distributed
transactions, stateful application logic,
or even AI workflow, I'm hearing lots of people
building AI agent workflow with durable
function.
seems like kind of a better candidate because
probably it's mostly code that you're writing,
so it's probably easier to just drop that
business logic and split it into steps within
your lambda handler.
So that's maybe a case where I would prefer to
pick durable functions over Step Functions.
So that's probably everything we had to share.
I know this was a long episode,
so maybe Eoin, I don't know if you want to
try to give a quick recap and then we'll wrap
it up.
Sure thing.
So what do we have to say about durable
functions?
You know, still Lambda, same scaling,
but you can write multi-step workflows in code
now with checkpoints, weights, and a nice resume
model.
Big mental shift here is you're thinking in
atomic steps and the system persists progress so
you don't have to hand roll orchestration queue.
And we did talk about the resume model because
that's where the power is.
And it's also where a lot of the surprises live.
So what makes us excited about this?
Well, I think it feels like a really interesting
middle ground between raw lambda plus lots of
glue and full-blown orchestration.
I think we're really excited for the long waits
and human approvals, the fact that you could do
this now without paying for them, and the fact
that a durable execution can hang around for up
to a year.
That's pretty impressive.
So has anybody out there tried durable functions
yet?
We'd love to hear from any listeners or viewers.
What did you build?
What tripped you up first?
What were your successes?
And if you haven't tried them yet,
where do you think they'd fit better than step
functions into your world?
So let us know in the comments or reach out
on socials.
We really want to hear real world experiences,
good and bad.
And if you've got a weird edge case or gotcha
story, even better, send it our way and we might
cover it up in a follow-up episode.
Lastly, thanks again to 4theorem for backing us
and powering this episode.
If you want help designing and implementing an
AWS architecture that's simple, scalable,
and not too hard on cost, head to 4theorem.com.
Thanks so much for joining us again,
and we'll catch you on the next episode.